README.md, before:

Shoots is dataframe storage server. Currently is supports pandas, but most likely I will add support for polars in the future.

Shoots is entirely written in Python and is designed for Python users.

Shoots comes in 2 parts, a server and a client library.

Shoots is very early software, but is in a usable state. It is stored on [github](https://github.com/rickspencer3/shoots). Issues and contributions welcome.

# shoots_server
The server tries to be a fairly faithful Apache Flight Server, meaning that you should be able to use the Apache Arrow Flight client libraries directly. It is entirely built upon the upstream [Apache Arrow project](https://arrow.apache.org/).

Under the hood, the server receives and serves pandas dataframes, storing thenm on disk in [Apache Parquet](https://parquet.apache.org/) format. However, shoots is designed so that, as a user, you don't need to know about the underlying storage formats and libraries.

# shoots_client
The client pieces wrap the [Apache FlightClient](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/python/generated/pyarrow.flight.FlightClient.html) to offer an interface for pandas developers, abstracting away the Apache Arrow and Flight concepts.

# usage
## installation
There is a [pypi package](https://pypi.org/project/shoots/) so you can install using pip(3):

```bash
pip install shoots
```
or

```bash
pip3 install shoots
```

This will allow you to run the Shoots server directly from the cli along with any command line arguments as documented below:

```bash
shoots-server
```

## starting up the server
### terminal
Running the server is a simple matter of running the python module, depending on your system:

```bash
python shoots_server.py
```
or 

```bash
python3 shoots_server.py
```

### start up options
ShootsServer supports the follow CLI arguments:
 - ```--port```: Port number to run the Flight server on. Defaults to 8081.
 - ```--bucket_dir```: Path to the bucket directory. Defaults to ./buckets.
 - ```--host```: Host IP address for where the server will run. Defaults to localhost.

For example, to run on localhost, but for a different port and bucket directory:
```bash
python3 shoots_server.py --port=8082 --bucket_dir="/foo/bar"
```

To enable TLS on the server, provide an SSL certificate and key.
 - ```--cert_file```: Path to file for cert file for TLS. Defaults to None. 
 - ```--key_file```: Path to file for key file for TLS. Defaults to None.

To enable JWT-based authentication, provide a secret string:
- ```--secret```: A secret string use to generate a JWT and authorize clients with that JWT. TLS must be enabled.

These options can also be set via environment variables.
 - ```SHOOTS_PORT```
 - ```SHOOTS_BUCKET_DIR```
 - ```SHOOTS_HOST```
 - ```SHOOTS_CERT_FILE```
 - ```SHOOTS_KEY_FILE```
 - ```SHOOTS_SECRET```

### python
You can also start up the server in Python. It is best to start it on a thread or you won't be able to cleanly shut it down.
```python
from pyarrow.flight import Location
import threading

location = Location.for_grpc_tcp("localhost", 8081)
server = ShootsServer(location, bucket_dir="/foo/bar") #bucket_dir is optional
server_thread = threading.Thread(target=server.run)
server_thread.start()
```

#### Running Securely
To run the server with TLS enabled start the server with both the a certificate and key.  This is accomplished by passing the strings for the certificate and key as a tuple.

##### Add TLS
```python
with open(cert_file, 'r') as cert_file_content:
    cert_data = cert_file_content.read()
with open(key_file, 'r') as key_file_content:
    key_data = key_file_content.read()

server = ShootsServer(location,
            bucket_dir=self.bucket_dir,
            certs=(cert_data, key_data))
server.start()
```
Note below that if you are usig a self-signed certificate, you should create the certificate and key with a root certificate that can be shared with the client, so that the client can verify that the it is the actually expected server that is responding.

#### Using a JWT
The server can require a JWT from the client to authenticate that the client is legit. This requires TLS to be enabled so that the jwt is not passed around in clear text. To enable JWT authantication, supply a secret to the server, generate a JWT, and then the client can use that token to authenticate with the server.

```python
server = ShootsServer(self.location,
                    bucket_dir=self.bucket_dir,
                    certs=(cert_data,key_data),
                    secret="some_secret_to_generte a token")
token = server.generate_admin_jwt() # give the token to the client
server.start()
```
Note that a token will be generated and printed to standard out at start up as well.

See below for how to create a client that uses the token.

## shutting down the server
### from the shoots client
Shoots supports a ```shutdown``` action. You can call it from the shoots client:

```python
from shoots_client import ShootsClient

shoots = ShootsClient("localhost", 8081)
shoots.shutdown()
```
### from python code
The Shoots shutdown function handles the threading, so you can simply call it.

```python
server.shutdown()
```

## creating a client object
### connect to a server running in insecure mode
ShootsClient requires a host name and port number:
```python
shoots = ShootsClient("localhost", 8081)
```

### connect to a server with TLS enabled
You can enable tls by setting use TLS to True.
```python
shoots = ShootsClient("localhost", 8081, True)
```

If the server is using a self signed certicate for TLS, you need to provide the root certificate to the client. You do this by passing in the certificate a string.
```python

root_cert = ""
with open(path_to_root_cert) as root_cert_file:
    root_cert = root_cert_file.read()

shoots = ShootsClient("localhost", 8081, True, root_cert)
```

### connect to a server that requires a JWT
If the server requires token authentication, then assuming you have the token, use it when you create the client object.

```python
 client = ShootsClient("localhost", 
                            port, 
                            True,
                            root_cert,
                            token=token)
client.ping()
```

## storing a dataframe
Use the client library to create an instance of the client, and ```put()``` a dataframe. Assuming you are running locally:
```python
from shoots_client import ShootsClient
from shoots_client import PutMode
import pandas as pd

shoots = ShootsClient("localhost", 8081)
df = pd.read_csv('sensor_data.csv')

shoots.put("sensor_data", dataframe=df, mode=PutMode.REPLACE)
```
## retrieving a dataframe
You can simply get a dataframe back by using its name:
```python
df0 = shoots.get("sensor_data")
print(df0)
```
You can also submit a sql query to bring back a subset of the data:
```python
sql = 'select "Sensor_1" from sensor_data where "Sensor_2" < .2'
df1 = shoots.get("sensor_data", sql=sql)
print(df1)
```

Shoots use [Apache DataFusion](https://arrow.apache.org/datafusion/) for executing SQL. The [DataFusion dialect](https://arrow.apache.org/datafusion/user-guide/sql/index.html) is well document.

## listing dataframes
You can retrieve a list of dataframes and their schemas, using the ```list()``` method.

```python
results = shoots.list()
print("dataframes stored:")
for r in results:
    print(r["name"])
```
------
```bash
dataframes stored:
sensor_data
```
## deleting dataframes
You can delete a dataframe using the ```delete()``` method:
```
shoots.delete("sensor_data")
```

## resampling dataframes
You can resample (aka "downsample") dataframes on the server by sending either a command for a time series dataframe, or just send SQL for any arbitrary dataframe.

### resample with SQL
```python
self.client.resample(source="my_source_dataframe", 
                    target="my_resampled_dataframe",
                    sql="SELECT * FROM my_source_dataframe LIMIT 10",
                    mode=PutMode.APPEND)
```         
### resample time series
```python
self.client.resample(source="my_source_dataframe", 
                    target="my_resampled_dataframe",
                    rule="10s",
                    time_col="timestamp",
                    aggregation_func="mean",
                    mode=PutMode.APPEND)
```
## buckets
You can organize your dataframes in buckets. This is essentially a directory where your dataframes are stored. 

### creating buckets
Buckets are implicitly created as needed if you use the "bucket" parameter in ```put()```:

```python
shoots.put("sensor_data", dataframe=df, mode=PutMode.REPLACE, bucket="my-bucket")
df1 = shoots.get("sensor_data", bucket="my-bucket")
print(df1)
```

### listing buckets
You can use the ```buckets()``` method to list available buckets:

```python
print("buckets:")
print(shoots.buckets())
```
------
```bash
buckets:
['my-bucket', 'foo']
```

### deleting buckets
You can delete buckets with the ```delete_bucket()``` method. You can force a deletion of all the dataframes contained in a bucket by using ```BucketDeleteMode.DELETE_CONTENTS```, otherwise you need to delete all of the dataframes first.:

```python
print("buckets before deletion:")
print(shoots.buckets())
shoots.delete_bucket("my-bucket", mode=BucketDeleteMode.DELETE_CONTENTS)
print("buckets after deletion:")
print(shoots.buckets())
```
------
```bash
buckets before deletion:
['my-bucket', 'foo']
buckets after deletion:
['foo']
```
# Running Tests
There are tests for checking running in insecure mode (no TLS or JWt), TLS only (no JWT), or JWT(also with TLS). The tests are designed to run without extra dependencies.

To run the tests, navigate to the project directory, add the project directory to your python path, and run the tests (from the project directory):

```bash
$ export PYTHONPATH="/path/to/shoots:$PYTHONPATH"
$ python3 tests/run_tests.py   
```

This will run all 3 test cases in parallel.

To run a single test, you can drop into the tests directory and run the test directly:

```bash
$ cd tests                                                 
tests $ python3 -m unittest tls_test.TLSTest 
```

There is an additional test for testing large data sets which is, by necessity, slow. As such it is not included in the ```run_tests.py`` program. To run this test:

```bash
tests $ python3 -m unittest large_datasets_test.LargeDatasetsTest
```

# License
This edition of the code is licensed under the MIT license.

# Roadmap
I intend to work on the following in the coming weeks, in no particular order:

- [X] add a runtime option for the root bucket directory, use it for testing
- [X] pip packaging
- [ ] pattern matching for ```list()```
- [X] downsampling via sql on the server
- [ ] combining dataframes on the server
- [X] compressing and cleaning dataframes on the server
- [X] authentication
- [ ] UI with SQL tree view browser and editor

Commit message:

update with overviewing mentioning important things such as supporting multiple simulataneous clients

README.md, after:

# Overview
Shoots is dataframe storage server for Pandas. 
 * Supports multiple clients simultaneous read and write clients.
 * Has a Pandas "native" client to make it easy for Pandas developers.
 * Has built in functions for resampling.
 * Use Apache Parquet files for efficiency on disk.
 * Uses Apache Arrow in memory for efficiency in memory and data transfers.

Shoots  is stored on [github](https://github.com/rickspencer3/shoots). Issues and contributions welcome.

## shoots_server
The server tries to be a fairly faithful Apache Flight Server, meaning that you should be able to use the Apache Arrow Flight client libraries directly. It is entirely built upon the upstream [Apache Arrow project](https://arrow.apache.org/).


## shoots_client
The client pieces wrap the [Apache FlightClient](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/python/generated/pyarrow.flight.FlightClient.html) to offer an interface for pandas developers, abstracting away the Apache Arrow and Flight concepts.

# usage
## installation
There is a [pypi package](https://pypi.org/project/shoots/) so you can install using pip(3):

```bash
pip3 install shoots
```

This will allow you to run the Shoots server directly from the cli along with any command line arguments as documented below:

```bash
shoots-server
```

## starting up the server
### terminal
Running the server is a simple matter of running the python module, depending on your system:

```bash
python shoots_server.py
```
or 

```bash
python3 shoots_server.py
```

### start up options
ShootsServer supports the follow CLI arguments:
 - ```--port```: Port number to run the Flight server on. Defaults to 8081.
 - ```--bucket_dir```: Path to the bucket directory. Defaults to ./buckets.
 - ```--host```: Host IP address for where the server will run. Defaults to localhost.

For example, to run on localhost, but for a different port and bucket directory:
```bash
python3 shoots_server.py --port=8082 --bucket_dir="/foo/bar"
```

To enable TLS on the server, provide an SSL certificate and key.
 - ```--cert_file```: Path to file for cert file for TLS. Defaults to None. 
 - ```--key_file```: Path to file for key file for TLS. Defaults to None.

To enable JWT-based authentication, provide a secret string:
- ```--secret```: A secret string use to generate a JWT and authorize clients with that JWT. TLS must be enabled.

These options can also be set via environment variables.
 - ```SHOOTS_PORT```
 - ```SHOOTS_BUCKET_DIR```
 - ```SHOOTS_HOST```
 - ```SHOOTS_CERT_FILE```
 - ```SHOOTS_KEY_FILE```
 - ```SHOOTS_SECRET```

### python
You can also start up the server in Python. It is best to start it on a thread or you won't be able to cleanly shut it down.
```python
from pyarrow.flight import Location
import threading

location = Location.for_grpc_tcp("localhost", 8081)
server = ShootsServer(location, bucket_dir="/foo/bar") #bucket_dir is optional
server_thread = threading.Thread(target=server.run)
server_thread.start()
```

#### Running Securely
To run the server with TLS enabled start the server with both the a certificate and key.  This is accomplished by passing the strings for the certificate and key as a tuple.

##### Add TLS
```python
with open(cert_file, 'r') as cert_file_content:
    cert_data = cert_file_content.read()
with open(key_file, 'r') as key_file_content:
    key_data = key_file_content.read()

server = ShootsServer(location,
            bucket_dir=self.bucket_dir,
            certs=(cert_data, key_data))
server.start()
```
Note below that if you are usig a self-signed certificate, you should create the certificate and key with a root certificate that can be shared with the client, so that the client can verify that the it is the actually expected server that is responding.

#### Using a JWT
The server can require a JWT from the client to authenticate that the client is legit. This requires TLS to be enabled so that the jwt is not passed around in clear text. To enable JWT authantication, supply a secret to the server, generate a JWT, and then the client can use that token to authenticate with the server.

```python
server = ShootsServer(self.location,
                    bucket_dir=self.bucket_dir,
                    certs=(cert_data,key_data),
                    secret="some_secret_to_generte a token")
token = server.generate_admin_jwt() # give the token to the client
server.start()
```
Note that a token will be generated and printed to standard out at start up as well.

See below for how to create a client that uses the token.

## shutting down the server
### from the shoots client
Shoots supports a ```shutdown``` action. You can call it from the shoots client:

```python
from shoots_client import ShootsClient

shoots = ShootsClient("localhost", 8081)
shoots.shutdown()
```
### from python code
The Shoots shutdown function handles the threading, so you can simply call it.

```python
server.shutdown()
```

## creating a client object
### connect to a server running in insecure mode
ShootsClient requires a host name and port number:
```python
shoots = ShootsClient("localhost", 8081)
```

### connect to a server with TLS enabled
You can enable tls by setting use TLS to True.
```python
shoots = ShootsClient("localhost", 8081, True)
```

If the server is using a self signed certicate for TLS, you need to provide the root certificate to the client. You do this by passing in the certificate a string.
```python

root_cert = ""
with open(path_to_root_cert) as root_cert_file:
    root_cert = root_cert_file.read()

shoots = ShootsClient("localhost", 8081, True, root_cert)
```

### connect to a server that requires a JWT
If the server requires token authentication, then assuming you have the token, use it when you create the client object.

```python
 client = ShootsClient("localhost", 
                            port, 
                            True,
                            root_cert,
                            token=token)
client.ping()
```

## storing a dataframe
Use the client library to create an instance of the client, and ```put()``` a dataframe. Assuming you are running locally:
```python
from shoots_client import ShootsClient
from shoots_client import PutMode
import pandas as pd

shoots = ShootsClient("localhost", 8081)
df = pd.read_csv('sensor_data.csv')

shoots.put("sensor_data", dataframe=df, mode=PutMode.REPLACE)
```
## retrieving a dataframe
You can simply get a dataframe back by using its name:
```python
df0 = shoots.get("sensor_data")
print(df0)
```
You can also submit a sql query to bring back a subset of the data:
```python
sql = 'select "Sensor_1" from sensor_data where "Sensor_2" < .2'
df1 = shoots.get("sensor_data", sql=sql)
print(df1)
```

Shoots use [Apache DataFusion](https://arrow.apache.org/datafusion/) for executing SQL. The [DataFusion dialect](https://arrow.apache.org/datafusion/user-guide/sql/index.html) is well document.

## listing dataframes
You can retrieve a list of dataframes and their schemas, using the ```list()``` method.

```python
results = shoots.list()
print("dataframes stored:")
for r in results:
    print(r["name"])
```
------
```bash
dataframes stored:
sensor_data
```
## deleting dataframes
You can delete a dataframe using the ```delete()``` method:
```
shoots.delete("sensor_data")
```

## resampling dataframes
You can resample (aka "downsample") dataframes on the server by sending either a command for a time series dataframe, or just send SQL for any arbitrary dataframe.

### resample with SQL
```python
self.client.resample(source="my_source_dataframe", 
                    target="my_resampled_dataframe",
                    sql="SELECT * FROM my_source_dataframe LIMIT 10",
                    mode=PutMode.APPEND)
```         
### resample time series
```python
self.client.resample(source="my_source_dataframe", 
                    target="my_resampled_dataframe",
                    rule="10s",
                    time_col="timestamp",
                    aggregation_func="mean",
                    mode=PutMode.APPEND)
```
## buckets
You can organize your dataframes in buckets. This is essentially a directory where your dataframes are stored. 

### creating buckets
Buckets are implicitly created as needed if you use the "bucket" parameter in ```put()```:

```python
shoots.put("sensor_data", dataframe=df, mode=PutMode.REPLACE, bucket="my-bucket")
df1 = shoots.get("sensor_data", bucket="my-bucket")
print(df1)
```

### listing buckets
You can use the ```buckets()``` method to list available buckets:

```python
print("buckets:")
print(shoots.buckets())
```
------
```bash
buckets:
['my-bucket', 'foo']
```

### deleting buckets
You can delete buckets with the ```delete_bucket()``` method. You can force a deletion of all the dataframes contained in a bucket by using ```BucketDeleteMode.DELETE_CONTENTS```, otherwise you need to delete all of the dataframes first.:

```python
print("buckets before deletion:")
print(shoots.buckets())
shoots.delete_bucket("my-bucket", mode=BucketDeleteMode.DELETE_CONTENTS)
print("buckets after deletion:")
print(shoots.buckets())
```
------
```bash
buckets before deletion:
['my-bucket', 'foo']
buckets after deletion:
['foo']
```
# Running Tests
There are tests for checking running in insecure mode (no TLS or JWt), TLS only (no JWT), or JWT(also with TLS). The tests are designed to run without extra dependencies.

To run the tests, navigate to the project directory, add the project directory to your python path, and run the tests (from the project directory):

```bash
$ export PYTHONPATH="/path/to/shoots:$PYTHONPATH"
$ python3 tests/run_tests.py   
```

This will run all 3 test cases in parallel.

To run a single test, you can drop into the tests directory and run the test directly:

```bash
$ cd tests                                                 
tests $ python3 -m unittest tls_test.TLSTest 
```

There is an additional test for testing large data sets which is, by necessity, slow. As such it is not included in the ```run_tests.py`` program. To run this test:

```bash
tests $ python3 -m unittest large_datasets_test.LargeDatasetsTest
```

# License
This edition of the code is licensed under the MIT license.

# Roadmap
I intend to work on the following in the coming weeks, in no particular order:

- [X] add a runtime option for the root bucket directory, use it for testing
- [X] pip packaging
- [ ] pattern matching for ```list()```
- [X] downsampling via sql on the server
- [ ] combining dataframes on the server
- [X] compressing and cleaning dataframes on the server
- [X] authentication
- [ ] UI with SQL tree view browser and editor
